well the US Secretary of State Anthony
blinkin has called the international
Criminal Court's move to request arrest
warrants for Israeli leaders quote a
profoundly wrongheaded decision Israel
denounced the ICC on Monday after the
Court's Chief prosecutor requested a
warrant for the arrest of Israel's prime
minister and the defense minister over
the war in Gaza now in a statement a
spokesperson for prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu urged quote nations of the
civilized free world to oppose and
condemn the decision several of Israel's
other Western allies have also
criticized the Court's move saying that
it equates Israel's actions in Gaza with
hamas's October 7th terrorist
attack well I'm joined Now by luwis
Mareno OKO the founding prosecutor the
first Chief prosecutor of the
international criminal court Mr ampo
it's good to have you with us I want to
just start by asking you what did you
think yesterday when the chief
prosecutor Mr Khan when he announced
that he is seeking arrest warrant for
Israeli and Hamas
leaders well I'm grateful that we have
an international criminal court because
um it's instit is a Judicial institution
the prosecutor is doing his job now
three judges will review the evidence
and in some
way put order no the law know is the law
no one no one can commit war crimes or
crimes against humanity and if someone
do it and the I has jurisdiction is
intervening so I think it's it's
providing order the the case that the
chief prosecutor wants to build um
against Netanyahu and the Israeli
defense minister Galant I mean if you
read through through it it's talking
about um attempts to starve the people
in Gaza starvation it is not an
accusation of genocide that's a correct
read
right yeah he did not charge genocide he
charged war crimes and crimes against
humanity but that very serious charges
no um no and so the reaction to that
what we've seen in the last 24 hours US
President Biden he has called the move
by the chief prosecutor outrageous
saying we're talking about false
equivalencies here if you're putting
Israel in the same basket as Hamas now I
understand that the chief prosecutor
said in an interview with CNN's
Christian Almanor yesterday that he made
the announcement yesterday in an attempt
to be fair and balanced that means
including Hamas and the Israeli leaders
in the same announcement um was that the
right decision in your
opinion well the President Biden opinion
is a political opinion but it's
interesting because President Biden
knows there starvation there that's why
President Biden is building a port to
provide food and water in Gaza so what
he see as humanitarian assistance the
prosecutors see okay this a war crime of
starvation that's simple and I would
say prosecutor charged hus with work
crimes and crimes against humanity very
important and and then a different crime
for Mr nanyu and Mr Gallant but they are
still innocent they have the right to go
to court so this the beginning of the
process they're Innocent but it's very
important let the let Justice work now
there are yeah I was just going to say
Mr I but what about the Optics of this
no one is disputing perhaps the facts on
the ground but the Optics having this
announcement include the repu the is
leaders and the Hamas leaders um can one
can argue that maybe it wasn't the right
decision considering what the public
opinion is at the moment in Gaza well
what when when you are the I prosecutor
Peter williz you whatever you do if if
Mr Khan persecute just Hamas half of the
world would say how you ignoring it yeah
he
justy half of the world would say how
you Hamas he persecuted both at the same
time oh why you do this come on he's
doing his job it's important he present
a very strong case something very
important he did he request a group of
advisors to check his case including the
meron who is who was a victim of the
Nazi regime he was in a labor camp he
was a legal advisor of Israel so you
cannot believe the Maron is anti-Semitic
so we are talking about international
law criminal law that's what they are
doing political comments are political
comments this is very important law has
to be respected I I I also want to get
your thoughts on what we've heard from
Washington Republican lawmakers they
have threatened to sanction the ICC at
the same time secretary of state blinkin
has said that he will work with Congress
to formulate what he has called an
appropriate
response should the court be worried
about any type of act by the United
States to punish it for this
decision well for me it's the world
should be worried that one country is
threatening to prosecute judges or
prosecutors for doing their job I think
that is
worrying Mr ampa we appreciate your time
tonight looks like we've lost the signal
there but we appreciate that's Luis
Marino ampo the first Chief prosecutor
at the ICC thank you Mr ampo